Small area estimation (SAE) furnishes a cost-effective method for obtaining, and is of importance due to a growing demand for, reliable small area data. For example, in epidemiology, while tremendous sources of health data exist for national and/or state levels, local health departments almost always lack access to small area data. One major problem of SAE is how to generate reliable estimates of interest for small areas with data only available at a coarser geographic resolution. A collection of methods has been proposed and applied to address this issue, including ones based upon generalized linear models, multilevel mixed models, and Bayesian map analyses. These methods tend to borrow information from both individual-level data and area-level covariates to yield relatively smoothed estimates for a finer geographic resolution with good accuracy. 

Lung cancer, the leading cause of death for both men and women worldwide, has received substantial research attention. Geographers are interested in exploring spatial patterns of lung cancer rates across various geographic landscapes. The literature notes that positive spatial autocorrelation frequently is detected in a setting where a similar population group clusters (e.g., a Hispanic community). However, spatial autocorrelation enhances the complexity of a model, and a failure to accommodate it can generate biased parameter estimates and misleading statistical inferences. Thus, how to properly account for spatial autocorrelation in SAE is another challenge faced by spatial scientists. The literature presents spatial models to tackle it, including the Spatial Empirical Best Linear Unbiased Predictor; but this topic still remains underexplored.

The goal of this study is to estimate lung cancer incidence rates at census tract resolution in Florida by incorporating demographic risk factors (e.g., age, sex, and race) of individual cancer cases coupled with socioeconomic risk factors (e.g., income, education, and employment) at the county resolution. The estimation methods include creation of a synthetic population, and a Poisson regression specification. Also, a Moran eigenvector spatial filtering method is utilized to accommodate a spatial autocorrelation component latent in the data. With the availability of geocoded lung cancer incidence points, the estimation results can be directly compared with the actual observed cancer incidence rates. Particularly, cancer rate maps are produced to evaluate if each estimation method adequately captures the underlying spatial pattern of cancer rates.
